---
layout: post
title:  "About me"
date:   2016-07-09 12:03:34 -0500
---
Hi! I'm Nick. I study Computer Science at the University of Texas at Austin. I enjoy things like photography, basketball, music, and trying out new things. I'm from San Antonio, Texas, although I was born in Springfield, Ohio and have lived in many different places from Indianapolis, Indiana to Tampa, Florida.

I live for the process. If I didn't enjoy the process of programming I would have quit after the 4th all-nighter for my Principles of Computer Systems class (a.k.a. learning how to repair an airplane from scratch while it's airborne and both engines are dead, but with C and systems programming). I also love creating, especially through technology. These are my two fundamental values, and my life is just a combination of things that fit them. They're why I was drawn to programming, as it's an extremely creative and process-driven art. These values are also why I was drawn to photography. I recently bought a new camera (my first DSLR!!), and the first day I got it I filled up a 64gb SD card with pictures and only kept 100 (out of around 4000). Today, I figured out how to do manual focus and I spent at least an hour just inside my apartment taking pictures of my succulents, furniture, the sunset from the window, the spinach I had just cooked, literally anything I could point my camera at. No one will ever see these pictures. Even I probably won't look at them again, but the process of slightly tweaking focal length and zoom was just too enthralling to me. 

I could do a whole post about my relationship with photography and how it relates to my programming interest, and I probably will, but this is my "About me," so I'll end it here. I'm really just a college kid trying to get a grip on the world by typing Java (or Python, or Javascript...) into a computer and taking pictures of my latte from the hottest new café with stunning detail. What I hope to accomplish with this blog besides put my scattered thoughts into words publically avaliable on the internet is to give a glimpse into a flawed individual's journey from college into the complex, seemingly impenetrable (to most people, at least) tech world. If you're reading this, I hope that you take away that however anonymous and big and scary the programming world gets, at the end of the day we're all humans tapping away at our keyboards.

Nick
